Xdev Handbook (#7)
ncar-xdev/ncar-xdev.github.io: about/xdev.md

_NCAR needs to change how its scientists and software engineers relate to one another, and how technology for data science and analysis at NCAR is developed openly._

Xdev was created to be the catalyst for this cultural change at NCAR, not just by teaching Python but by working with scientists in direct collaboration on software, and therefore teaching open development by example.

To achieve this, Xdev acts as navigators for NCAR scientists in the Pangeo sea.  As such, Xdev helps NCAR scientists adopt a common approach to enabling broad multidisciplinary collaboration through its education and development efforts.  Xdev’s _education_ efforts to teach scientists at NCAR (and beyond) Python and the Pangeo stack help build and strengthen the Pangeo community of technology _users_.   Meanwhile, Xdev’s _development_ efforts to collaborate with scientists on Pangeo technology development help teach open development and open source software best practices through example.

## The Xdev Manifesto

> Xdev is an NCAR entity, and therefore must satisfy NCAR priorities and strategic objectives.  Xdev is also commited to the _external_ Pangeo community, and therefore it behoves us to enumerate our _technical values_ to highlight how Xdev’s values align with Pangeo.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Xdev is an NCAR entity, and therefore must satisfy NCAR priorities and strategic objectives.  Xdev is also committed to the _external_ Pangeo community, and therefore it behooves us to enumerate our _technical values_ to highlight how Xdev’s values align with Pangeo.

```

Author: Thanks!  I wrote this fast, so I'm sure there are more typos.  😄

:::

## Mission & Vision

**Xdev’s mission is to advance open reproducible science through interactive Big Data analysis.**

> We envision a community of scientists at NCAR and beyondworking together to develop and maintain scientific workflows and sharable software to support those workflows on a platform where these workflows can be efficiently developed in collaboration and executed.  We envision these workflows to be reproducible, using Jupyter Notebooks with fixed versioning and environments (e.g., using containerization).  We envision a core group of scientists within that community who have helped develop and support the technology that makes much of this possible, who follow modern engineering best practices and who leverage each other’s technology to quickly and efficiently develop new capabilities and new workflows, as well as help other scientists learn these skills and knowledge themselves.  We envision all of this technology supporting and empowering not only NCAR staff but the entire community that NCAR supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We envision a community of scientists at NCAR and beyond working together to develop and maintain scientific workflows and sharable software to support those workflows on a platform where these workflows can be efficiently developed in collaboration and executed.  We envision these workflows to be reproducible, using Jupyter Notebooks with fixed versioning and environments (e.g., using containerization).  We envision a core group of scientists within that community who have helped develop and support the technology that makes much of this possible, who follow modern engineering best practices, and who leverage each other’s technology to quickly and efficiently develop new capabilities and new workflows, as well as help other scientists learn these skills and knowledge themselves.  We envision all of this technology supporting and empowering not only NCAR staff but the entire community that NCAR supports.
```

As the community of scientists who use this style of analysis, and who contribute back to the software that makes this analysis possible, develops and grows, we envision Xdev’s contributions will slowly shift toward more specific engineering efforts that optimize, stabilize, and strengthen the ecosystem of technologies used by the scientific community.  However, we envision Xdev still remaining a resource for scientists on all engineering matters, especially on matters that extend beyond the role that scientists nominally play.  Xdev will continue to remain a resource of software engineering knowledge and expertise for the community.

### Xdev & ESDS

> The [Earth System Data Science](https://ncar.github.io/esds/) initiative was created to motivate scientists to build community around using technology for open reproducible science:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Earth System Data Science](https://ncar.github.io/esds/) initiative was created to motivate scientists to build a community around using technology for open reproducible science:
```

:::{margin}
Read more about the [ESDS Vision](https://ncar.github.io/esds/about/#about-us)!
:::

> > The Earth System Data Science initiative aims to profoundly increase the effectiveness of the NCAR/UCAR workforce by promoting deeper collaboration centered on analytics, improving our capacity to deliver impactful, actionable, reproducible science and serve the university community by transforming how geoscientists synthesize and extract information from large, diverse data sets.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The Earth System Data Science initiative aims to profoundly increase the effectiveness of the NCAR/UCAR workforce by promoting deeper collaboration centered on analytics, improving our capacity to deliver impactful, actionable, reproducible science, and serve the university community by transforming how geoscientists synthesize and extract information from large, diverse data sets.

```

The frequency of these meetings and how they are conducted are expected to evolve as the team progresses.

## Activities

Xdev is involved in two main activities: training and development.  Xdev’s training activities center mostly around tutorials and hackathons, organized and held in collaboration with [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org) and [ESDS](https://ncar.github.io/esds).  Xdev’s development activities are centered on short-term projects, one-off prototypes, and center-wide service support.  These development activities focus mostly on usability issues, rather than performance enhancements.  There are usability pain points that we believe need to be addressed before too much focus can be spent on optimization and performance, though we recognize that some focus on performance is necessary to assure that developed solutions are scalable or "efficient enough."

### Education & Training

> Xdev’s premier product addressing education and training is the Python Tutorial Seminar Series, a bi-weekly one-hour seminar series occurring on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month at 1PM mountain.  The series started with a simple introduction to Python and has built up to Xarray and Dask. Many of these tutorials and the training material that accompanies them are being transferred to Project Pythia, with which Xdev closely collaborates.  At the time of this writing, there have been 19 tutorials in the Python Seminar Series, of which 7 were prepared and conducted by non-Xdev members (mostly members from GeoCAT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Xdev’s premier product addressing education and training is the Python Tutorial Seminar Series, a bi-weekly one-hour seminar series occurring on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month at 1 PM mountain.  The series started with a simple introduction to Python and has built up to Xarray and Dask. Many of these tutorials and the training material that accompanies them are being transferred to Project Pythia, with which Xdev closely collaborates.  At the time of this writing, there have been 19 tutorials in the Python Seminar Series, of which 7 were prepared and conducted by non-Xdev members (mostly members from GeoCAT).
```
